Dyson, and you're going out to Bethlehem, PA next week to give a talk.
And I guess the title of the talk is the same of this most recent book of yours.
Right.
Well, you're right.
Race Rules, Navigating the Color Line.
Oh, that's not.
Okay.
No, I thought the title was Between God and Gangster Rap.
Well, I had that book come out earlier this year, and I got another book coming out in a couple weeks.
Give me the full title and the publisher.
Yeah, it's called Race Rules, subtitled Navigating the Color Line.
Yeah.
And it's being published by Addison Wesley.
Okay.
Well, who's your publicist there?
A woman named Debbie Youse.
Okay.
So maybe we can do a triple whammy here.
Oh, yeah.
Her number is 212-463-8591.
Okay.
So now maybe we can get into my little syndicate of 25 newspapers.
Right.
Because I do a weekly piece on an author.
And I'm in largely university towns, which is perfect for us, you know, for you.
I'm in Charlottesville, Virginia.
I'm in Eugene, Oregon.
I'm in Jackson, Mississippi.
I'm in Gainesville, Florida.
I'm in four New England papers.
I'm in Columbus, Austin, Salt Lake City.
So that's a diverse readership.
And what brings it all together is that I write about pertinent things and literary things.
Wonderful.
So if you get this new book coming from Addison Wesley, then you and I can do some business here.
That's right.
That's what I'm saying.
See, when I talk to you again, then we'll talk about, you know, you'll have a chance to check that book up, and then we'll talk for an hour, two hours.
When's that publishing?
October 23rd.
Oh, that's great.
Yeah.
Cool.
All right.
So let's not even talk about that because I haven't had a chance to.
Is that the title then of this talk that you're doing?
I guess so, man.
You know, my wife has smoked these things up, so I have no idea.
But I think that must be that.
Well, why don't you give me an idea of how this new book builds on your previous work?
How's that for a nice opening question?
Well, I extend through this new book some of the themes I've been preoccupied with before.
but I try to bring them to an even broader audience.
And I deal with crises in contemporary black culture and cultural expression.
So I'm looking at black institutions, black major events in black life and relationships in black culture.
The events that I examine are things like the O.J.
Simpson trial and the consequences of that trial.
And I look at the Million Man March through the lens of the leadership styles and aspirations of Colin Powell and Minister Louis Farrakhan.
And then I also look at institutions of black life like the black church.
I have a long chapter on the black church and sex where I try to talk about the understanding of embodiment within African American religious circles and the degree to which that
sense of embodiment has been reflected in secular culture and also constrained some of it, or been contrasted to some of its expressions.
And I have a long chapter on hip-hop culture, but really it uses hip-hop culture to examine the kind of intergenerational debates among African Americans, and especially the culture of nostalgia, as I say, the pockets of nostalgia, the hearkening back to a golden age of black life that
I think never existed, but it's certainly used rhetorically to try to trump some of the most recent expressions of black culture.
When you go out like this, as you are, I certainly have to localize it to Bethlehem, PA, where I've never been.
Right, right.
But when you go out like this, do you have any sense of who your audience is going to be?
Yeah, well, you know, I always get a kind of lowdown on, you know, they'll give me, I ask them to fax me about a week before so it should be coming early.
Yeah.
of, you know, what kind of problems and issues that people are dealing with, what kind of situation they're in, what are some of the issues that they want to see addressed, and how I can best fit in.
So yeah, I try to get a sense of some of the local color, as it were, to give texture to my own speech.
But in the larger sense, is there a general message, or is there a message that you're trying to convey?
Yeah, well, I'm trying to talk about the complexity of race and the difficulty of speaking across racial boundaries.
but the necessity for doing so.
And so my project is about trying to forge connections between, you know, not only black and white, but among African Americans of different classes, different castes, if you will.
And so that message is that, you know, we've got to deal with the history of race and the facts of race so that we can get an appreciation for what the historic problems have been.
And then we've got to move beyond that
to forging the future of race and figuring out how we can constitute a better, healthier, more insightful
community, whether locally or nationally, to try to figure out how to get beyond this bitter racial impasse that I think we're presently bogged down in.
In one of the reviews between God and Gangsta Rap, one of the reviewers suggested that you preach a canon of inclusion.
Is that true, number one?
And if it is, perhaps you could explain or define that for me.
Yeah, well, if what is meant by candidate of inclusion is that I'm trying to talk about a wide variety of peoples and perspectives and ideas that are allowed to constitute what it means to be black or how we reflect upon those texts and ideas and books that are important, musics and so on, then that's absolutely right because I'm about trying to figure out a way of doing that.
And then secondly, if inclusion is meant I want to strategize for
intervening in these larger mainstream societies and having black folk and other minorities participate, that's absolutely true as well.
You know, beyond that, then, what I'm trying to do is to talk about how the canon, the books of... Oh, boy.
You're really getting into my ballpark now.
Yeah, yeah, right.
I should defer, right?
Yeah.
But, you know, given these recent canon debates, and as I, in between God and Gangstrap, I have that chapter on Shakespeare and Smokey Robin.
Right.
Where I try to talk about, you know, it's about both and, not either or.
We don't have to trash...
you know, Eurocentric or European tradition, even though we can examine its weaknesses and its flaws and its limitations of vision, but we can also embrace certain elements of that tradition because it's been remade through the lens of an American and especially African-American culture.
So you're a moderate in this regard, probably.
Well, I would think that I'm a person who is radically investigating those specific forms of black culture, but
I'm not an Afro-centrist, and I wouldn't give Afro-centrism as the radical edge unless it certainly might be an extreme perspective.
You would not say that's the radical edge?
That is not the radical edge?
No.
Well, it's an extreme edge, I would think, but I don't think radical.
See, radical, I reserve the difference, say, between Martin Luther King Jr.
and Malcolm X. Well, Malcolm certainly at a certain level might have been more militant, but I think King was more radical.
So he's radical in the sense he's going to the roots of society, trying to figure out how we can redistribute resources that make the largest impact upon black people.
So that's radical to me.
So when I think of radical, I think it's much more radical to challenge the domination of interpretation of these books by white authors, to challenge how those interpretations have gone out, and to challenge how people have read Shakespeare, how people have read Melville, how people have read Thoreau.
how people have read Emerson and see that through the perspective and lens of different cultures.
I think that's much more radical than saying, let's have a purely Afrocentric perspective that says, let's ground and root the world.
And why even bother with Shakespeare and Thoreau and Emerson?
I mean, I've heard that you can get a degree at Georgetown University now in English literature.
I mean, I read this in the New York Times.
Without being required
to study Shakespeare or Milton or Schotzer or Spencer.
And I wonder how good a degree, I mean, maybe get a degree in literature, but to call it English literature, and not to read these four white, dead, white European males, to me is ridiculous, truthfully.
And it's also equally ridiculous to be ignorant of Du Bois, and of Hurston, and of Morrison, and of, you know, and Baldwin, and Ellen.
Well, go ahead.
I did the first interview in the country last year with Dorothy West.
I went out to Martha's Vineyard, and I got that piece in 40 papers, including the Philadelphia Inquirer.
You've got to send me a copy.
It's the best piece.
In fact, my friend Charles called me the day it ran in the Philadelphia Inquiry.
He said, Nick, I posted this in the Sullivan Hall here on campus at Temple.
She is, to me, she's a goddess.
So the thing, as you know then, the thing is that
You know, it's a broad and wide tradition, as Lawrence Levine has proved in his latest book, that what it was meant by the canon was an invention after the World War.
Oh, that's the brand new book from Beacon, right?
That's right.
I just got it.
Yeah.
So let's not pontificate about the canon when the canon is something of recent invention.
You think so, a recent invention?
Well, a recent invention in the sense of what books are constituted in that canon, not the notion of a canon.
Yeah, you see, this is going to be a great chapter in my new book.
I'm just entering this debate here.
Oh, yeah, right.
And I already spent three hours with Harold Bloom down in New Haven two or three weeks ago.
And, you know, he's there.
He does represent...
Oh, no question, no question.
Well, see, when we talk again, we won't be able to do it today, but when we talk again, we're going to have a heck of a time.
I may even have to come down and see you.
Well, that would be great.
Let's do that.
Because I also want you to recommend to me other people.
Sure.
I know Gates here at Harvard is an obvious... Right, right, right.
But other people, yeah, I'll definitely do that.
Yeah, you should come on down.
We'll spend a day like this guy is doing in about 15 minutes.
Okay, well, so let's... He's coming from Kansas, and he's going to be here for all day.
Okay, well, so let's...
Let's get a couple of sound bites here for this piece.
Right, right.
Such as it is.
So what I'll jump to then is, this is easy here, we go to the final paragraph of the preface and you say, as I write albums by hardcore rapper Tupac Shakur and Black Pop, Legend of Stevie Wonder, etc.
So let's just bring this up to date with the Shakur.
Yeah, yeah.
Maybe you can give me a comment on that.
I'll do that.
Well, I wrote a piece about three or four weeks ago for the LA Times on Tupac.
that you might want to eat if you got online or something like that.
I do.
You think I'll just go L.A.
Times?
It should be there, right?
Yeah, yeah, it'll be there, like, you know, the Sunday opinion section about three, four weeks ago.
I'll do a search under your name, so it should pop right up.
Right, right, right.
Okay, good.
Don't you love this online culture?
Yeah, it's something else, man, it's something else, you know, so convenient.
Can't live with it, can't live without it, as they say.
It's amazing, isn't it?
It's amazing.
Go ahead, shoot.
So I think that Tupac, you know, certainly was a very important figure and is one of the few figures, I think, who has what authors describe in biblical circles and others as a literary future, that is a person whose life will constantly be the source of new stories
about his possible interpretation and how we refigure him and rethink him in light of our needs at the time.
So I think that Tupac is one of the first guys to survive as an urban legend, or I think he will be.
That is, you know, unlike, say, majority culture where people are always spotting Elvis, people are now claiming that Tupac is not dead, but that he's in Hawaii somewhere living or something.
Well, what's interesting about that is that here's a guy who, because of
the contradictory lessons that he put forth.
On the one hand, to resist violence.
On the other hand, to embrace it wholeheartedly.
On the one hand, to respect the integrity of black female identity.
On the other hand, to engage in rapacious sexual liaisons.
So he was a very complex young man who was struggling toward a definition of himself and trying to figure out what to do with his life, but always giving voice to the deepest struggles of young black males in our society.
So in that sense,
He's a profound figure.
He's certainly not a hero, but he is a tragic figure.
And he's tragic, I think, because he didn't trust the genius of his own ability to represent the ghetto, to represent street life, to represent the harshness of the gangster culture in which he aspired to participate at a certain level.
his representations were just as powerful as the real.
So he fled the representative world for the real world.
And when he got involved in the real world, that is, you know, the trouble he got involved with, the criminal activity that he sometimes, you know, in terms of pistol-whipping somebody.
Romanticized, in fact, didn't he?
Well, it's a deep glamorization.
Glamorization, that's the better word.
And the problem with that, of course, is that
You know, those people who jump on the Tupac Shakurs of the world often miss how the culture in which we live has conditioned them and has given them certain levels of response that they then, when successfully exercised, we then penalize them for.
But we don't talk about the real vulgarity.
The real vulgarity and obscenity was not simply the language he used or the ideals he spoke.
But it was the conditions that provoked him to speak in the first place.
So there are multiple vulgarities there.
There's a lot of obscenity going on.
And I think Tupac was a very powerful figure in that gangster culture.
Now, I think that, again, as I write in the L.A.
Times piece, the tragedy of Tupac is that he didn't trust the genius
his own genius, his own ability to represent that world without trying to live that world.
See, the gospel song, I want to live the life I sing about in my song, that's fine when you're talking about ideals within a gospel worldview, but when it comes to gangster rap culture, this quest for the authentic, this quest for the real, is a deeply problematic one.
Not, of course, peculiar to gangster culture, because for authenticity is throughout black culture.
But I think the way in which it played itself out with Tupac is deeply problematic.
I genuinely admire the honesty with which you recognize the shortcomings.
For instance, you obviously point out the sexist and homophobic views that are expressed in a good deal of gangster rap.
It's important to recognize, to point out the shortcomings.
I mean, you don't...
If you'll excuse me here for jumping ahead here.
You describe yourself as an inveterate polyglot.
How about just picking up a tad on that?
Yeah, well, I think we have to speak a whole host of languages, a variety of rhetorics and styles of speech.
And I say that because, you know, I'm an ordained Baptist minister.
I'm a, you know, PhD from Princeton.
I'm a former teen father, welfare father, and so on.
So, you know, there are a variety of languages that I've learned, appropriated, and tried to distribute.
And they're all relevant.
I hope so.
I think they are.
I think that when we...
You know, we don't want to simply speak the academic speak, as you know, which is... Which basically is worthless if you're trying to reach a wider audience.
Come on, I mean, you know, it's fine if you want to speak to 12 people, and there's virtue in speaking to 12 people for, you know, on certain subjects in certain ways.
I don't, you know, dog that or gain say that.
On the other hand, as you're absolutely right, if we want to, you know, be able to express with a certain amount of moral passion and clarity...
issues that engage us and motivate us to speak in the first place.
We've got to do them in ways that people comprehend.
And I think that in that sense, being a journalist or being a public intellectual, a person who's able to articulate clearly and cogently, hopefully, ideas that affect a broad variety of people and in ways that they comprehend them, or at least they get the point, that's crucial to me.
But I'm also a Baptist preacher, so I think that language of the gospel and the black gospel worldview
is, you know, incredibly important from, you know, articulation as well.
Let's just call, the guy in Allentown just asked me to ask you this question, so it doesn't come for anything that I've got pending, but he said, ask you about Spike Lee's movie on the Million Man March.
I don't know anything about this, but do you have any comment on this?
I've got, you know, my new book, I deal with the Million Man March.
In fact, I've got a 1,500-word piece coming on the Washington Post tomorrow on the Million Man March.
Oh, good, I'll get it.
I want to get the post up here.
kind of unfair kind of Million Man March.
Well, I think that Spike Lee's Get on the Bus is a highly anticipated film that would be a wonderful kind of memento of the spirit of achievement and of love and of sacrifice and of self-reinvention that black men expressed a year ago in the Million Man March, which I participated in with my son and wife, as a matter of fact.
So I think that Spike Lee's Get on the Bus is an attempt somehow to, through a cinematic vision,
you know, explain and examine what was going on there, what drove black men to come to Washington, D.C., what motivated them to move from every nation and, you know, every Hamlet and every city and every county in this nation to converge on Washington, D.C.
The Million Man March, it seems to me, was important because regardless of what one believes about black men marching to D.C.,
that it rebutted vicious stereotypes about black men, that they're violent, that they don't love one another, that they can only, you know, get together for causes of catastrophe and suffering, not of celebration of our own virtues.
And I think that the Million Man March, you know, as elementary as that sounds, and as fundamental as that appears, certainly contributed to a, you know, to Americans rethinking black men, and it also gave black men a boost
not only to their egos, but to their self-definition, that they can and should engage in criticizing crime in their communities, becoming more responsible for their own lives and lifestyles, and that they should begin to build a culture that's much more positive and healthy and productive than ones that are destructive and negative and vicious.
So I think that was a very important point.
moment for the African-American men in this country.
And just briefly, I mean, this whole debate over the actual numbers seems so ridiculous to me.
Oh, it's just stupid.
As if it wasn't a million, but maybe 800,000.
Or maybe 1.2 million.
Exactly.
The point is that, but I was there, and I have no doubt, forget those numbers.
I mean, it was more than a million men there.
I mean, I was standing there on the stage.
What's interesting is that as if it was only, you're right, 750,000, oh my God, it was a failure.
Well, that still would have constituted the largest
you know, gathering of any kind in our nation's capital.
It was a historic, monumental achievement.
And plus, in this day of instant communication, people were there without having, without actually being there.
Oh, man, millions more before.
You know, because this was covered.
I mean, you know.
Listen, you've got a thing coming up.
Oh, you want me to send something to you?
Send it to the university or give me... Okay.
The 5125 Oak Brook Drive.
Two words?
One word.
And that's Durham, North Carolina, 27713.
Okay, what I'll do is I'll send you my Dorothy West piece.
Oh, man, I'd love to see it.
I got a letter from her editor after Jackie at Doubleday, unsolicited, and he said this is by far the best piece.
He said, I never write journalists.
He said, this is the best piece that anybody has done on Dorothy West.
Thank you for writing it, something like that.
Man, wonderful.
Well, I got it.
Put all your stuff in there, too.
The whole works.
And we'll connect.
We're going to get together.
Yeah, we're going to do that.
I want you to give me a buzz back.
Come on down here and we'll spend a day.
I think it sounds good.
And in the meantime, I'll get in touch with Addison Wesley.
And I do think it's great that you're going out to a trade publisher.
Right.
Because I love Oxford, but I had to call three bookstores to get that book last night.
And that's why I went with Holt.
I mean, Yale wanted to do my book.
I love Yale.
But give me a break.
I want more than 1,000 people to read it.
Thank you, man.
And that's the thing.
And see, there's interest in the kind of stuff... You know, that was a collection of my journalism between God and Gangstrap, so that's an audience that could have been reached.
You know, now, Oxford...
They did sell, you know, for, you know, using an academic book might sell, what, 1,400 copies, but that might have sold, like, 14,000.
Yeah, well, without any advertising.
Well, you know, without a whole lot, you know.
Yeah, so, I mean, that's remarkable.
Yeah, so, you know, and the book I did on Malcolm, of course, was named one of the notable books of, you know.
Well, I just read, you know.
So that book, you know, did well, and then the book before that, Reflecting Black.
Yeah, well, I mean, I went to the public library yesterday.
They didn't have...
the new garden gangster rap they did have the malcolm book clark well you don't have to hear all this but we'll talk and you you get ready have a cup of coffee and uh and we'll hang out like this guy's doing today we'll just hang out for a day and uh kick it sounds great all right friend good luck take care bye